# sccotplasma-
Using machine learning to predict squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue by plasma proteins
Machine learning (ML) to predict cancer development has the potential to improve risk assessment and early intervention. In this study, we establish an ML model for predicting the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue (SCCOT) based on levels of multiple circulating proteins. Data from 261 proteins related to inflammation and/or tumor processes in 123 blood samples collected from healthy persons, but of whom a sub-group later developed SCCOT, were analyzed. Samples from people who developed SCCOT within less than 5 years were classified as tumor-to-be and all other samples as tumor-free. The optimal ML algorithm for feature selection was identified and feature importance computed by the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) method. Five popular ML algorithms (AdaBoost, Artificial neural networks (ANNs), Decision Tree (DT), eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) and Support Vector Machine (SVM)) were applied to establish prediction models, and decisions of the optimal models were interpreted by SHAP. The SVM prediction model showed the best performance (sensitivity = 0.867, specificity = 0.859, balanced accuracy = 0.863, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC-AUC) = 0.924), and a total of 22 proteins rendered varying impact on model decision. In conclusion, we demonstrate the utility of circulating protein-based ML models to predict SCCOT before the appearance of clinical signs.
